= Textual xtUML Specification and BridgePoint Support

xtUML Project Analysis Note

== 1 Abstract

The xtUML community has identified a need for a text-based language
specification for representing xtUML models. Among other reasons, this would
decouple the language from the tooling (BridgePoint), lower barrier to
involvement by users and developers alike, ensure long term viability of xtUML
models, and improve the quality of documentation concerning the language and its
tools.

In December of 2021, a draft specification of a text-based xtUML based on MASL
was written and distributed. TODO ref.

In the Sprint of 2022, the BridgePoint team introduced a feature to persist
xtUML graphical layout in a textual format. TODO ref.

In October of 2022, Levi Starrett gave a presentation at the annual
Shlaer-Mellor Days conference outlining a proposal for such a language and a
roadmap to achieve the goal. TODO refs. This note is written to analyze a subset of the
roadmap to identify requirements and challenges related to the project.

== 2 Introduction and Background

Before going on, the reader should read the original specification (TODO ref),
and watch the presentation video (TODO ref).

image::roadmap.png[roadmap]

This note will focus on the roadmap items circled in blue. Particular emphasis
will be put on the items circled in red.

== 3 Requirements

=== 3.1 Language Specification

Six related specifications shall be written:

- Core language
- Action language requirements
- Graphical layout
- Marking
- MASL
- BridgePoint xtUML

Each specification shall consist of written descriptions of the parts of the
language and lexical and parser grammars where appropriate. Each distinct rule
of the language shall be given an identifier to enable cross referencing with
test suites.

The so-called "informal diagrams" (Activity, Use Case, Sequence, etc.) shall not
be supported by this set of specifications.

==== 3.1.1 Core Language

The core language specification will capture the semantic parts of the language
except for activity bodies. This includes data models, behavior models,
interfaces, etc. as well as the built in constructs such as the type system and
execution rules.

==== 3.1.2 Action Language Requirements

The action language specification shall define the minimum requirements for a
compatible action language though no specific action language shall be
prescribed at the start.

==== 3.1.3 Graphical Layout

The graphical layout specification shall define the format for capturing
graphical layout data for the semantic models.

==== 3.1.4 Marking

The marking specification shall define the format for capturing additional
annotations on model elements. This data is used by specific tools to attach
configuration data independent of the models themselves.

==== 3.1.5 MASL

The MASL specification shall be an extension of the core language specification
to provide backward compatibility to existing MASL models.

==== 3.1.6 BridgePoint xtUML

The BridgePoint xtUML specification shall be an extension of the core language
specification to provide backward compatibility to the current version of xtUML
implemented by BridgePoint. It is expected that some fringe features of the
language will be deprecated during the process of writing the core
specification. Therefore, this additional specification will be required to
capture the differences without carrying unnecessary complexity forward.

==== 3.1.7 Versioning

Each specification shall be strongly versioned. A survey of other
languages/standards/specifications shall be conducted to determine an
appropriate versioning strategy. The versioning strategy shall be conducive to
incremental improvement.

==== 3.1.8 Distribution Media

The specifications shall be written in AsciiDoc. They shall be viewable on GitHub
directly in the repository. Generation of HTML and PDF versions of the
specification shall be supported.

==== 3.1.9 Community Review and Incremental Improvement

This specification shall be written and maintained in public view of the xtUML
and Shlaer-Mellor communities. The writers shall seek feedback through
appropriate channels at each stage of creation and future maintenance. Existing
BridgePoint users shall be consulted on the details of their usage of the
language and its more fringe features.

Future versions of this specification shall be maintained collaboratively by
users of the specification. Other community members are encouraged to
participate, but active users of the spec (tool developers and tool users) shall
be prioritized.

A process shall be outlined to make changes to the specification and publish new
versions. The writers shall look to the example of other successful
languages/standards/specifications for guidance.

=== 3.2 BridgePoint Support

The BridgePoint persistence mechanism shall be updated to support the core
language, graphical layout, and marking specifications.

==== 3.2.1 BridgePoint Core Language Persistence

BridgePoint shall support loading and persisting full xtUML meta-models as text
files compliant with the core language specification.

The "informal diagrams" shall continue to be persisted as SQL insert statements
and shall be linked at load time to the semantic instances.

==== 3.2.2 BridgePoint Graphical Layout Persistence

BridgePoint already supports graphical persistence as text. The implementation
shall be updated to be compliant with the specification defined here.

==== 3.2.3 BridgePoint Marking Persistence

The BridgePoint marking editor shall be updated to be compliant with the
specification of marking data defined here.

=== 3.3 Meta-models

TODO

=== 3.4 Platform Independent xtUML Persistence Domain

TODO

== 4 Analysis

TODO

== 5 Work Required

TODO

== 6 Document References

. initial specification
. presentation video
. presentation PDF
. MASL links

. [[dr-1]] https://support.onefact.net/issues/NNNNN[NNNNN - headline]
. [[dr-2]] ...
. [[dr-3]] link:../8073_masl_parser/8277_serial_masl_spec.md[Serial MASL (SMASL) Specification]

---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---
